Globular Cluster Project

Project Supervisors: Ivan Baldry

Introduction:
Globular clusters can contain hundreds of thousands of stars and are some of the oldest objects we know about in the Universe. 
Due to their age, and the number of objects contained within each one, there are a fantastic laboratory for studying the life cycle of stars. 
We can find out a lot about the evolution of the stars, and the chemical composition of the Universe by looking at, and comparing, these clutsers and assessing their ages. One of the best ways to estimate the age of the cluster is to look at the distribution of stars using a plot known as the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram: this is what you will be doing for your project.

M5, M10 and M92 are all globular clusters which orbit around the Milky Way galaxy. 

Concentrate on M5 initially for your project. This globular cluster has the following characteristics:

Object: Globular Cluster
Constellation: Serpens
RA: 15h 18m 33.22s
Dec: +02 deg 04' 51.7" 
Mass: 8.57 x 105 Solar Masses
Radius: 80 light years

We have taken observations of each of these globular clusters in May 2014 using the IO:O instrument on the Liverpool Telescope, and the observations were taken in 2 broad
band filters, the B and the V.

This project is to try and produce a Hertzsprung-Russell (HR), or colour-magnitude, diagram
of at least one of these globular clusters. You will use tools in LTImage to measure the 
brightness of various stars in both bands and then EXCEL to present your results.


TIPS:

(1) Learn about globular clusters (Web Search)
(2) Investigate what a HR diagram is and what it's used for (Web Search)
(3) Find out some more information on M5 (Web search)
(4) What would you expect to see on a HR diagram of a globular cluster, and what do you measure? (Web search)
(3) Learn about the Liverpool Telescope (use www.telescope.livjm.ac.uk or www.schoolsobservatory.org.uk/learn/eng/tels/lt)
(4) Learn about the IO:O instrument (www.telescope.livjm.ac.uk/Info/TelInst/Inst/)
(5) Remind yourself how to measure brightness with LTImage
(6) Only chose stars which have a relatively clear background annulus
(7) Conduct meaurements on the data
(8) Present results using Excel and draw up your conclusions
(9) Write a 1000 word report and a 10 minute presentation

